the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
so that is electron affinity but
honestly chemists don't really talk so
much about electron affinity they prefer
to talk about electronegativity and
these are highly related terms so this
was also recopied although completely
identical I think between the handouts I
just thought it was weird to have recopy
this and not this so your handout for
today is is perfect on on this point so
electron negativity the net ability of
an electron to are an atom to attract an
electron from another atom so you can
see that electron affinity and
electronegativity are very similar in
fact all of these terms are highly
related to each other and this idea of
electronegativity of this as a term for
a way of thinking about atoms initiated
with Linus Pauling but here I have up a
different picture
I have Robert Millikan and the reason
why I picked this picture is because he
helped a few years after Linus Pauling
came up with this idea coming up with an
equation that help people think better
about what electronegativity is and
another reason why I picked his picture
to put up here instead of Linus Pauling
is that he was an MIT undergraduate he
was a chemistry major I'm not sure in
1917 or whenever that was a yearbook
picture on when he took what weather I
don't think it was 511 one at that point
but at some point he was here studying
chemistry just just to like you and then
when he got a faculty position later on
he did some beautiful work that had to
do with bonding that he got the Nobel
Prize so some of you may have a nobel
prize in chemistry one day and it's you
want to make sure your yearbook picture
is at least as good as this one for
other generations of professors to show
your picture and describe the work that
you did to contribute to the field of
chemistry oh and he was born in
Massachusetts too so he is uh he is a
native to this area in more than one way
all right so the way that he and this is
a little bit more of a squishy
definition so electron negativity is
proportional to 1/2 and ie stands for
what ionization energy and ei are
electron affinity that we just discussed
all right so it's it's related to these
other terms that we have already talked
about so let's let's think about then
what this means so we can consider an
atom with high electronegativity and an
atom with low electronegativity I mean
want to think about whether an atom with
high electronegativity is going to be an
electron acceptor or an electron donor
and that you can tell me and that is
going to be a clicker question so you
can try to grab your handout while
clicking at the same time
all right so we'll take 10 more seconds
yes 88% that's great of course if you
looked and said if you didn't believe it
could be a donor then that rolled out
three of the four but that's okay those
are those are good things so yes if it
has high electronegativity it's going to
be an electron acceptor and part of the
reason for that is that it has a high
affinity for electrons and another part
of the reason for that is that if you
look at the equation when you have a
high ionization energy something that
has a high ionization energy is not
going to want to be is not going to be a
good donor so that wouldn't make sense
so both of those both of those terms
having high in both categories is
consistent than with with this trend so
let's take a little bit more of a look
at that and why this is true so high
electronegativity and atom with high
electronegativity is an electron
acceptor and then low would be a donor
and so if we think about this and this
is our periodic table and again it's not
going to be including our noble gases we
really don't want to be accepting or
donating anything so in this corner then
we had our high ionization energy and we
also saw last class that we had a high
electron affinity and we saw last class
we had high ionization energy so it
doesn't want to it doesn't want to give
up an electron but it does want to
accept one so we have things that are
going to be good acceptors and down here
we have low ionization energy so it's
easy to donate an electron oh let me
just put these up sorry so we have then
if you're high and high up here you have
something that's a good acceptor and
it's going to have a high
electronegativity so high high means
high over there and then down here we
have low low which means we have low
electronegativity low ionization energy
it's easy to give something up low
electron affinity it doesn't want
electrons it's happy to give up
electrons and if it gives up electrons
then you can get a complete octet it can
have a noble gas configuration so on
this side you need electrons this side
it's happy to give them up so if we look
then you know just a period
table again this makes sense we gain an
electron over here we get our happy
noble gas configuration we lose
electrons over here we do the same thing
so that's a way to think about
electronegativity all right so why
should we care about electronegativity
and that's because a lot of atoms that
are electronegative are used in
pharmaceutical molecules and that this
gives them special properties so to hear
in their own words we're going to hear
from a former UROP ER katerina talking
about why you should care about
electronegativity my name is Katerina
because it's come I come from Ukraine
and I'm interested in how microorganisms
fight each other humans are very smart
they have found chemical ways to make
new drugs and so we spend a lot of time
and money on making a new antibiotic and
then we put into people and we hope for
the best bacteria are also very very
smart and they somehow learn to resist
this new antibiotic that we just made
bugs on the other hand have been
fighting each other with the same
molecules for thousands and thousands of
years and we see no resistance
developing there so we want to learn
what it is about the antibiotics that
bugs make to fight each other that makes
them so difficult to develop resistance
to normally living organisms use 20
amino acids but these bugs get very
tricky and building their anti other
bugs molecules
so to add the functionality bugs can do
chemistry on the building blocks the
amino acids themselves and so one of the
things that they can do is chlorinate
carbons which activates these carbons
for future chemistry the pretty nice
study the halogen ace sir b2 takes
chloride ion from the environment and a
molecule of threonine that you know acid
and puts those together forming at
chlorine carbon bond since chlorine is
so electronegative
when bonded to carbon it pulls electrons
away from the carbon atom and so it
makes the carbon to which it is attached
much more reactive toward other
molecules and this increased reactivity
that these partially accounts for the
antibiotic effect of the molecule I'm
hoping to figure out how sir b2
positions all the atoms in such a way
that they react in this very controlled
very appropriate manner so that later we
could maybe re-engineer this or other
proteins to make them do chemistry that
we want them to do my hope is that we
could understand sir b2 well enough that
we'll be able to remake it into a
protein that will actively participate
in synthesis new antibiotics so that is
Katerina and so how adding halogens
because they are so electronegative is
actually a very important area and I'll
give you a couple more examples I also
haven't watched that video in a little
bit and she said she was from the
Ukraine she's technically now part of
Russia I think from part of Russia so
anyway that's a topic for a different
day so this is this is big business
actually putting halogens on things and
a lot if you start looking at if you
become interested if you're taking an
antibiotic or something start looking at
what the molecule is start counting how
many halogens are on that molecule you
will find a lot so a lot of antibiotics
have halogens either chlorides or
fluorine as shown here also a very
common antidepressant has it another
example of something that is an anti
diabetic huge numbers of molecules have
halogens added to them some of these are
derived from natural products so Nature
was making these molecules to kill other
bugs as you heard about in the video
other times it was they came up with
this molecule and they said well we need
to make it a little bit different it's
being consumed too fast it's broken down
too fast in the body let's add some
halogens so sometimes it's sort of a
man-made tailoring but often it's a
tailoring that nature came up with so
why why all these halogens what's the
benefit of having a carbon fluorine bond
instead of carbon hydrogen and one
reason is that having a floor fluorine
this really electronegative atom on say
an arrow ring like this one it actually
sucks the electrons out of the ring and
makes it and we call or organic chemists
like to call electron poor so it just
kind of hauls those electrons away and
when you make something electron poor so
by replacing CH with C F that can make a
potential drug molecule electron poor
and what this does often is make it
harder to oxidize the molecule so we're
gonna talk about oxidation reduction
much later in this semester we'll come
back to this idea but this turns out to
be really important because the way that
the body metabolizes or breaks down
these molecules
is that it can oxidize it and there are
a number of enzymes in your liver which
will oxidize and break apart these these
drugs and so if you make it harder to
oxidize that makes the drug more stable
in your body so if you want to take a
drug you want it to last for a while and
especially if it's something an
antibiotic you want it to last till
kills all of the bacteria not just half
of them and in most medicines you need
them to be around for them to have their
effect so you want to tailor those
molecules so they don't get broken down
as easily in the body and so this is one
reason this is big business and a lot of
the times adding those halogens is
actually Falls pretty toxic chemicals so
some people like how to Rena are
interested in using enzymes to do it
instead some people who are still using
organic synthesis examples is Steve
buckwalds laboratory in fact if you go
to almost any top chemistry department I
think there's someone who's trying to
find out new methods of putting halogens
on molecules it's it's a it's a very
important area and designing new
molecules and improving them okay so
that is electronegativity so you know
one atom added to a big number of atoms
can change the property of the molecule
by sucking electrons away and now we're
going to talk about atomic and ionic
radius and also isoelectronic atoms so
atomic radius these trends are pretty
good we're back to some pretty good
fewer glitches so what is the atomic
radius so here we have two are two times
the atomic radius so the atomic radius
is defined by the value of R that has
about 90 percent of the electron density
I mean technically an electron could be
infinitely or close to infinitely far
away but pretty much most of them are
going to be about nine within ninety
percent and call that the radius of the
atom so there are trends trends are
pretty good so across the periodic table
what matters
is the Z effective see everything we've
learned about it comes back if you
didn't learn it on exam one still learn
it because we're gonna use it again
across the periodic tables the effective
matters down the periodic table and/or
the principal quantum number matters so
how do these matter so across the
periodic tables the effective is going
to do what increase or decrease so it's
going to increase across the periodic
table and this results in a decrease in
the atomic radius so again it increases
going across the periodic table because
you're adding you're adding both
electrons and protons but the electrons
are not giving you complete shielding so
you're not cancelling out every proton
with every electron so overall you get
an increase in the Z effective and
because of that when you have this
increased this this increased Z it's
kind of pulling the electrons in and
then it isn't until you go down the
periodic table when n increases that you
start to see the radius increase so
there the electrons are getting farther
farther away and so you are getting this
bigger thing so I like to think about it
sort of the mom at the park there's some
moms you know their kids are sort of
running running everywhere but other
ones are sort of you know hauling you
know hauling if their kids in they have
this positive force that seems to keep
them all sort of in the general area and
so they're shrinking the size of their
kids play area with this force that
they're exerting but if the kids get too
far away it's like yeah they're not
going to hear your call they're not
going to hear you jump up and down
they're not going to see you and so
they're just going to be out there and
the radius of your kids is going to be
farther away so we can look at these
trends if we're over here in the
beginning we're starting on this side
we're going across the periodic table we
go down then we have a jump up when we
increase n and then we go down again
then we have a jump up when we increase
n we go down again except over here
there's a little glitch those D
electrons they're back they're gonna
they're gonna they're gonna give you a
couple of glitches
I love D electrons we're going to talk
about the more around things
giving that's my favorite part of the
course those D electrons are always
causing trouble okay then we go up again
and then we go down and go up and go
down those are pretty good those are
pretty good trends all right
okay so ions ions are different than
their neutral parent once again so we
saw this before that when you start
filling the the three-d the energy
levels change so ions can have different
properties than their neutral parents
and so if we have two kinds of ions we
can have cations which are positively
charged and so a positively charged ion
will have lost an electron and so it's
going to be smaller than its parent and
so we can see here lithium and then in
the center that's lithium plus so when
you lose the electron the radius
actually shrinks quite a bit it's like
that that electron was just really kind
of causing a bigger radius and when it's
finally gone you're at a smaller a
smaller size over there anions
negatively charged ions so they're
gaining an electron and their radius is
larger than their parent and so you can
see over here we have oxygen in the
center oxygen minus two is much larger
and again we can see some of the other
trends some of them are the same the
ionic radius also in will increase when
we're going down a group so when n is
increasing so from lithium to sodium we
have an increase from fluorine to the
top of the periodic table to chlorine so
we still as we increase n increase in
size but you have to think about the ion
did it lose an electron or did it gain
an electron to think about how its size
change with respect to its parent so why
why does this matter there's a one
example of if you like if you're
interested in in biology or anything to
do with the brain or neurons then you
should care about ion channels so there
are channels and membranes that bring
ions in and this is
really important so ion channels are in
muscle cells and in neurons so if you
want to move or think something that MIT
students generally like to do both of
those things you need iron channels to
do that so ion channels should be
important to you and you want I in
channels they regulate the influx of
ions into the cell and allow for really
rapid responses which is also really
important and amazingly they're highly
selective for certain ions so this is
important it needs to be tightly
regulated say how much sodium you have
in there how much potassium that you
have coming in and if the ion channel
took potassium when it's supposed to
take sodium that would not be good so
that these channels are designed by
nature to be highly selective and so
they care to be highly selective and
you're talking about a plus one maybe or
another plus one they have to think
about the radius so why don't you tell
me what the differential is in the
radius from smallest to largest for
these three different ones
all right ten more seconds
okay great so most people most people
got that right let's just kind of take
take a look at that so here we want to
think about the neutral and then this
one has one less electron so that's
going to be smaller and then when you
compare potassium with sodium you have
to think about N and so this is down
farther so that's going to be bigger
than sodium so here we're thinking about
the difference in electron configuration
and here we're thinking about n all
right so amazingly these channels have
it figured out and so look at this this
is about significant figures there's too
many people lost points and significant
figures I have to say on the exam so
make sure you learn them but if you if
you had say you say Oh what's the
difference between one to three
significant figures the difference is
sort of the potassium versus the sodium
radius so one point three eight times
ten to the minus ten one point oh two
times ten to the minus ten those seem
like pretty small numbers does it really
matter if it's Oh two versus 0.38 and
the answer is yes you'd be dead if
nature could not distinguish between
these significant figures for you
so these channels are designed to be
selective at that kind of atomic scale
and only wet one ion in and so rod
MacKinnon who's a crystallographer won a
Nobel Prize for solving some of the
structures of these ion channels and
this just shows a ribbon drawing and
this shows an all atom drawing of a
channel and there's an ion going through
that's its hole and it's radius is
perfect for that
ion and the other one even though it's
not that many significant figures
different doesn't fit and that's pretty
amazing nature is truly amazing that's
the hole that makes a perfect hole just
for the one kind of ion that it's
supposed to accept all right so now
there are one more definition that we're
going to do there are things that can
have the same electron configuration
those are called ISO
electronic and let's think about those
they don't necessarily have the same
size but they have the same electron
configuration and I'm just gonna write
these out so why don't we think around
other ones near neon noble grass that
would have that exact configuration so
how do we get fluorine to have that
configuration what does it need to do
gain or lose an electron and how many
what would it state be so what what do I
write what's the thing for fluorine that
is gonna be the same electron
configuration just in terms of its
charge
I'd write F wife - 4 Oh what am I going
to write for oxygen what am I gonna
write 2 - and say nitrogen we'll stop
there what's that 3 - great let's go on
the other side what about for sodium
what a sodium have to do to have that
configuration plus what about Angie
- plus aluminum silicon 4 plus so you
get the idea and now we can think about
which will have bigger and which will
have smaller radii as well so are these
going to be bigger or smaller and on
because they've all gained and then over
here these will be smaller since they've
lost electrons compared to their parent
ion okay so let's just do one which
should be very fast clicker question it
is a clicker competition after all so
we've got to get in some extra clicker
questions
and this should be very fast I think
alright let's just do 10 more seconds
you have a periodic table up here in
case you need it
yeah okay that's not going to
distinguish the recitations very much
yeah so you just have to look at what is
nearby and think about how many
electrons it needs to gain or lose to
have the same configuration all right
bonds now we're up to bonds there are
three types of bonds we will discuss
today or we probably won't get through
them all today after all the handout
stuff but anyway that we will discuss in
the class over time now some of you have
probably figured out almost everyone has
probably figured out the one of the
things I love to do is teach chemistry I
love to teach chemistry some of you have
come to my office hours or pizza forums
or even paid attention to some of my
slides about office hours they realize
that I love dogs so I love teaching
chemistry and I love dogs what is the
most amazing thing that you can think of
dogs teaching chemistry so now I'm going
to let dog welcome to Doc's teaching
chemists tell you about bonding
it's chemical bonding chemical bonds are
what holds atoms together a chemical
bond is an attraction between atoms that
allows the formation of
chemical substance the electrons that
participate in a chemical bond are
called valence electrons these are
electrons that are founded in atoms
outermost shell let's take a look at the
types of chemical bonds that can be
formed between atom
an ionic bond is formed when one of the
atoms will lose its electron to the
other atom this results in a positively
charged ion called the cation and a
negatively charged ion called an anion
positive and negative attract and the
result is an ionic bond
covalent chemical bonds involve the
sharing of a pair of valence electrons
by two atoms there is also what is
called polar covalent bonds these are
covalent bonds in which the sharing of
the electron pair is unequal the result
is a bond where the electron pair is
displaced toward the more
electronegative atom
thanks for watching and we'll see you
guys next time
there's I think one other one but that
is totally the best one and everything
they say is exactly right so it's really
excited I even loved it when they had
the two like they put two balls in there
that they were sharing you know it's
just a really very well done okay so now
you probably you know filled in some of
your notes here but in case you missed
some of them I will tell you exactly
what the dogs just told you the dogs had
it completely correct so ionic bonds is
the transfer of an electron as you saw
and then degeneration of a cation and an
anion that are attracted to each other
due to the charge so the bonding comes
from that attraction between the
positively charged and the negatively
charged atom and an example that you're
probably all familiar with is table salt
NaCl and so you have any plus and Cl
minus that are attracted to each other
and form these bonds which creates table
salt so let's see how far we can get in
thinking about really this interaction
between ionic bonds and we'll see what
we can get through ionic bonds we might
have to wait till covalent bonds to till
Monday but let's see if we can finish
this so the formation of NaCl from
neutral na and neutral CL will first
involve forming your cations and your
anions so you have na going to na plus
plus an electron and so here you're
talking about a process where the energy
is going to be equal to the ionization
energy again so we're not moving far
away from these terms because you're
talking about
I am ionizing a neutral atom to an
a-plus and there's a value for that and
then we are talking about neutral Cl
neutral chlorine going to CL minus and
so it's gaining an electron so here are
the process you're talking about is the
the electron affinity and so the energy
change here is equal to the negative of
electron affinity which is minus 349 in
this case
so this is a favorable process here to
to gain this extra electron and so
overall the delta e here is negative so
now if we're going to talk about this
process here we have two of these so
we're gonna go we're gonna put these
guys together so we need both of those
to ionize and so we can add up what
energy difference we should expect to
form na+ and cl- together from their
parents and so we have now a plus we've
added these two together a plus 145
kilojoules per mole so this seems weird
its plus and so now we're seeing that
the formation of these ions from their
neutral atoms has this positive value
which means it requires energy but we
think about and you know NaCl is being
this natural table salt thing so you
know why why is why is there so much
table salt if this requires energy to do
it and the answer is that this is only
part of the process you need to form
your cations and anions but then you
have energy of them coming together so
they're attracted to each other and
that's a really important part of
forming the bond and they're attracted
by a simple Coulomb ik relationship here
so the attraction between the positively
charged and the negatively charged ion
has an energy of minus 589 kilojoules
per mole so overall then if you consider
both forming any in a plus and Cl minus
and the attraction between them we have
a negative Delta e of 4 4 4 so the net
energy here is in favor of forming NaCl
we have a decrease in energy this is a
stable compound so let's look at where
this number comes from so we just put
this up that's the Coulomb thing but
let's actually calculate this and see
where that number comes from so we're
back to columbic equations again we
never get very far away they turns out
to be very
important in chemistry so we have the
coulombic potential we have these are
charge on our ions we have the absolute
value of the charge of an electron
squared over 4pi our permittivity
constant and our our distance between
those ions and for NaCl the bond length
or the distance between na+ and cl- is
two point three six angstroms so we can
use that and just plug it into the
equation and we have plus one for the
sodium minus one for chloride so overall
this will be a negative term and if you
work out the math it's minus nine point
seven seven four times ten to the minus
19 joules and where does we have three
significant figures what's limiting our
significant figures yeah the bond length
is limiting it here oh I'm just figures
for a while until test two when you can
demonstrate I can stop talking about
significant figures all right so then we
want to convert to kilojoules per mole
because that was the number I gave you
was in kilojoules per mole so we have
our conversion factor between jewels and
kilojoules and I guess I should mention
up here Coulomb's cancel and our meters
cancel so we're left in joules up there
units are also important then we can use
Avogadro's number because we were given
kilojoules per mole and we can get out
the number I gave you before so this
number really just comes right out of
this equation minus 589 kilojoules per
mole so we have our ionization energy to
tell us about forming ions we have our
electron affinity and now we have a
coulombic relationship so I said before
this is what I showed you before that we
have this attraction that's favorable we
have forming the ions which was had a
positive energy associated with it but
overall this process is has a lower
energy it forms a bond but this is just
based on this calculation so we can ask
what is the experimental measurement for
this inter
action and we note that it's somewhat
different so we have instead of minus
four four four we have minus four one
one kilojoules per mole so why the
difference so again our ionic model
which just considers ionization energy
electron affinity and that positive
columbic interaction and our
experimental result so problems with
this model that we did up here include
that we only thought about favorable
interactions they're also going to be
some that are not favorable
you know protons against other protons
repulsion electron-electron repulsion so
there's some negatives there's an it's
never all positive in any relationship
whether it's sodium chloride or anything
else always some negatives and we ignore
those and the result of this is that
you're gonna get a larger Delta e
predicted than the experimental value so
it seems like this is more favorable
like that's a stronger bond a stronger
interaction but really if there's some
repulsion that's that's overestimated
it's really going to be a lower value
which is what you see in the experiment
also we just said that sodium plus was
one point charge and cl minus was
another it's more complicated their
interactions are more complicated than
that and we ignored quantum mechanics
but in doing that we did pretty well if
we have one significant figure we would
have been perfect so two one significant
figure these approximations work really
well okay that's it for today and I will
see you Monday have a great weekend
all right let's let's just take 10 more
seconds on the clicker question
great so people are getting the hang of
this if you hadn't yet there's still
time so as you're going across the
periodic table you are increasing Z and
increasing the Z effective as well
because you don't have total shielding
so aluminum is the correct answer it has
a lower Z effective and so therefore a
smaller ionization held energy the
electrons aren't held as tightly all
right so we're talking about chemical
bonds and it seems like an appropriate
topic to talk about when we're also
talking about bonding as a community so
that seems like a good thing so a
chemical bond is an arrangement of atoms
so that they come together in such a way
that they're lower in energy than they
were when they were apart so they're
more stable together than they were
apart and that's a chemical bond so this
is page 5 of the handout from last time
and excitingly we have lecture 10
handouts today so there's lots of lots
of things working today
all right so this is lower in energy ie
more negative when these atoms come
together so a chemical bond as you saw
last time with those wonderful dogs
sharing a pull toy a covalent bond is a
bond where the electrons are shared
between these two atoms and each atom is
giving up one bond to to share so we can
think about this more graphically as
what what is happening and we have this
little plot on your notes where you're
going to be filling in a bunch of
details so we have the inter nuclear
distance R the distance between the two
nuclei and we're back to hydrogen for
the moment so we're just going to talk
about a bond between two H atoms and on
the axis over here we have energy so we
have energy versus the distance between
these two hydrogen's so at zero energy
we just have the hydrogen's by
themselves they're not interacting with
each other in any kind of way that
lowers either one of their energies
there's
no interaction no no energy change
they're not interacting down here at
this dash line we do have a bond so we
formed h2 the hydrogen atoms are
interacting with each other and this is
lower in energy so what does this plot
look like then if you if you draw energy
versus this distance so up here
it's above at higher energy above zero
this is unfavorable going down to this
dashed line and then going back up to
zero so let's think about what's
happening here
and there's a bunch of different kinds
of interactions you can have between
those two hydrogen atoms they're
repulsive interactions nuclear-nuclear
repulsion electron-electron repulsion
and they're positive interactions like
the electron nuclear the positive and
negative so up here these atoms are very
close together and that is there really
too close and that's unfavorable to
objects trying to occupy the same space
at the same time is unfavorable but as
you start separating out these atoms
then they become more comfortable and
you get to a distance where you have the
sharing of electrons they're next to
each other they're interacting in a
positive way and they're sharing but
then if you bring them too far apart
they're no longer communicating with
each other we don't even know where one
of them is at this point they're just
kind of infinitely far apart no
interaction so we go from too close to
just right to too far away so this
distance here that has this minimum
energy okay so we have this minimum
energy here and that's the distance in
which you have this really favorable
interaction this bond length that's the
bond length between those two hydrogen's
right here now we can think about this
energy difference over here and it has a
special name so this is the dissociation
energy or Delta e sub D sometimes it's
just called big capital D in your
textbook so this is the energy that's
needed to dissociate those atoms so if
the atoms come together and they're
lower in energy if you then want to
break them apart you need to put energy
in so that they can be broken apart and
that's called the dissociation energy
and if it's a really big number that
means it's very hard to dissociate them
and if it's a small number it's pretty
easy
so this is our dissociation energy here
so for hydrogen
this value is 424 kilojoules per mole
and if we were putting it on this axis
here it would be right down here so it's
gonna be a negative value on this axis
we're below zero so the negative of the
dissociation energy is found down here
minus 424 kilojoules per mole and if you
wanted to break that bond you would need
to put in energy so dissociation energy
is positive it's the energy you need to
put in to break those bonds so we can
think about this plot now and consider
looking at the plot and evaluating what
you can and cannot say about different
kinds of compounds their bond lengths
and also their dissociation energies so
be good people mostly got this written
down and today for some of the people
who wanted to come late we can we can
post versions of this too alright so now
let's consider this plot and ask which
bond is stronger so we have hydrazine
and we also have molecular nitrogen n2
and in your dashed line you have
nitrogen n2 and in the solid line you
have hydrazine so can you just look at
this plot and tell me which is stronger
is nitrogen or hydrazine stronger and
you can just yell out what you think
yep so nitrogen is going to be stronger
here and people knew that because it's a
deeper well so you go way farther down
there's more stabilization it's a lower
energy a lower negative value of energy
so that means it's going to have a
greater dissociation energy you'd have
to put in more energy to dissociate
nitrogen nitrogen than these these two
sub molecules here in hydrazine alright
so we can also look at this plot and ask
the question which has a shorter bond
what do you think which bond is shorter
nitrogen as well right so nitrogen is
also the shorter bond and we know this
because this is increasing distance and
this is closer to the axis so this has a
shorter distance and later we're going
to be doing Lewis structures and other
things of nitrogen and discover it has a
triple bond which you may already know
and we'll talk more about nitrogen's
amazing triple bond as we go along and
so that's a very short bond and a very
very strong bond as well so you should
be able to look at these plots and
evaluate what kind of dissociation
energy you would have it's as bigger or
smaller and also what kind of distance
you expect between them and you should
be able to draw these kinds of plots on
the exam if asked in just kind of a
simple detail not nothing too fancy
alright so in terms of bond strength
carbon monoxide has one of the strongest
bonds so it has a very large
dissociation energy and iodide I too has
one of the weaker ones and later in the
semester we're going to be doing a demo
that shows why that's kind of cool that
a weak bond leads to some cool cool
demos okay so those are covalent bonds
and actually could you just close that
door please all right so let's finish
polar covalent and then we'll have our
our moment of silence and maybe it'll be
silent in the hallway by then as well
all right so polar covalent bonds so
last time
the dog showed you that you can have
equal sharing and unequal sharing and if
those of you who've watched dogs play
with pulley toys most the time the
sharing is pretty unequal and so
whenever you see that again you can
think polar covalent and tell your
friends and they'll be like I don't know
what happened to you at MIT those are
two dogs playing what are you talking
about so this is unequal sharing of
electrons between two atoms and this
happens when those atoms have a very
different electronegativity so in
general a bond between two atoms is
considered a polar covalent bond when
the difference in electronegativity
between the atoms is greater than 0.4
and less than 1.7 and that's Linus
Pauling's scale and works quite well so
if we look at this little plot we could
see that carbon hydrogen bond only has a
point four difference so that would not
be considered a polar covalent bond but
nitrogen hydrogen is a difference that
is greater than 0.4 so that would be a
polar bond and so you can use these
values to think about whether you're
going to have unequal sharing and the
more electronegative element is going to
be pulling on those electrons we also
can use this to think about polar
molecules and this is kind of a little
bit of a flash-forward to Friday's
lecture we're going to talk about shapes
of molecules because a polar molecule
has to have a pole has to have polar
bonds but also has to have those bonds
arranged in such a way that there's a
net difference there's a net dipole
there's a net kind of pulling of those
electrons in a different way so here is
carbon dioxide a molecule that causes a
global warming yes I said it on the
videotape yes I believe that human
beings are responsible for some of the
global warming and we should do
something about it this molecule does
have polar bonds so we have carbon in
the middle and oxygen here so carbon and
oxygen have a
electronegativity difference greater
than 0.4 but it's not really a polar
molecule it's a non-polar molecule and
that's because of its shape so shape
matters so we have we have pulling of
electrons one way but we have equal and
opposite pulling of electrons other way
this would be really cool if the dogs
could have done this as well so in this
case we have a non-polar molecule that
has polar bonds now there's only very
few cases where this would actually be
true and you really need to think about
the shape and so that's why we're going
to talk about shape another molecule
that also has polar bonds is water so
here we have polar bonds between the
oxygen and the hydrogen so oxygen and
hydrogen greater than point four but in
this case the shape of water is such
that they don't kind of cancel out and
you do have a net dipole you do have a
net charge on that molecule makes it a
polar molecule so we need to know about
the shape and we need to know about
electronegativity so in large organic
molecules sometimes we just talk about
the number of polar bonds and then think
about whether that's likely to be a
polar molecule or not you can't always
think about the shape of something
really complicated and what direction
all of the pulling and of electrons is
going but we can at least count polar
bonds so here are two vitamins vitamin A
and vitamin b9 which I think is also b10
and a number of other B's
it's name is folic acid they kept
finding it again and again so there's a
whole gap of B vitamins where they're
like Oh b9 folic acid b10 also folic
acid p11 think also folic acid b12 is
something different though so anyway
these this is a very important V V
diamond and I'm actually going to come
back to this molecule later in the
course but we can think about how many
polar bonds
it has and that's a clicker question and
there you have the molecules up here to
look at alright let's just take 10 more
seconds
it takes a while to count but I think
you probably can answer it without may
be fully counting all of them alright so
over here now the answer is the folic
acid and I'll just highlight you might
not have found all of these polar bonds
but you should have at least seen that
this one really didn't have many vitamin
A only has one so we have polar bonds
down here between carbon and oxygen over
here carbon and oxygen nitrogen hydrogen
carbon oxygen again nitrogen with
hydrogen oxygen with hydrogen nitrogen
with hydrogen over here so folic acid is
quite polar and if we're gonna think now
about whether it is a water soluble
vitamin or a fat soluble vitamin which
is something that a lot of times your
supplements will tell you about if it's
water soluble and we'll talk about this
more later like dissolves likes so water
likes polar molecules which makes folic
acid water soluble and makes vitamin a
fat soluble it's not very polar doesn't
dissolve very well in water and this
kind of turns out to be important in
that if you read your vitamin
supplements if you take vitamin
supplements it'll often tell you
interesting things like how many hundred
times over the daily recommended
allowance this vitamin tablet is and if
things are water soluble it doesn't
matter so much that you're taking way
more than your body actually needs you
just have a very expensive piece
but if it's fat-soluble then it's gonna
stay in your body and you don't need it
and it can be a little bit toxic so try
to think about the vitamins not
everything even though vitamins are good
for you they're not good in every kind
of amount that you could take so you
want you will now use your knowledge of
polar bonds to figure out whether you
should be taking certain vitamin
supplements